# Old North 1912 Restoration

From a letter from Bishop William Laurence to Mr. Bolton, July 11, 1912:

> Then, there might well be a Paul Revere tablet giving the true story, if there is one which no one can dispute, of his relations with Christ Church. I think that the people are interested in reading tablets which have the story as well as the bald facts.

In 2024 Old North Church began to uncover decorative cherubs which had been painted over during the 1912 restoration. As visitors crane their necks, they always express surprise that these little angels could ever have been painted over. I hope to tie this together into an essay eventually, but for now here are some transcriptions from letters held by the Massachusetts Historical Society.

## Old North: 1911 Renovations. Box 21, Folder 17

### R. Clipston Sturgis to Bishop Lawrence, Nov. 16, 1911

> Until I have further information I am somewhat at a loss as to what to advise. I can see nothing in the way of pews that would have anything to recommend it historically except a return to the original box pews, and this would be wholly out of keeping with the services of the church or the use to which this particular church is put. There is nothing either historical or practical in favour of retaining the present pews. On the other hand if the pews are wholly removed the interior will lose much of its historical character. To a certain extent this might be restored by replacing the present pulpit and reading desk with something more in keeping with the period of the church itself, and yet even here we could not reproduce the old work, even if we found any record of what it was, as combined pulpit, reading, and clerk's desk is hardly of much practical use today. It would seem as if it would be necessary to sacrifice some historical interest for the practical usefulness of the church, and put in a new level floor free from all pews, replace the chancel fittings of the seventies with those of better design, provide the building with chairs, and count on its general architectural character for its interest.

### R. Clipston Sturgis to Bishop Lawrence, Dec. 18, 1911

The church must have been closed, and they were trying to decide if repairs should begin in late 1911, or be deffered.

> If therefore it is desired to open the church for services now and continue them until spring, perhaps Easter, I cannot see any objection to such proceeding.




## Old North: 1911 Renovations. Box 21, Folder 18

### R. Clipston Sturgis to Bishop Lawrence, June 4, 1912

> I have not however been able to find any authoritative information at to the original arrangement of the pews, and until this is done it is impossible to estimate, even approximately, the cost of taking them out and rearranging. I should think it very probable that the removal of the present upper floor, which appears to be an independent super-structure, would give some clue to the exact arrangement of the original pews, and their dimensions, and this would enable me to estimate with some accuracy the rebuilding of the pews, and also, which is more important, would enable me to lay out the pulpit and reading desk so that these also could be estimated accurately. I have not as yet got any information as to what the original pulpit was, and if we find it impossible to get a record of this I presume we would follow a contemporaneous type, as I did at Newburyport.

> ... would make a total of $13500.00. I think I am safe in saying this is a very conservative figure, and that on each item we have probably an outside figure. I realize this is a considerable amount, but I do not know of anything that could well be omitted.

### R. Clipston Sturgis to Bishop Lawrence, June 4, 1912

> We have taken up the floor and some of the pews in the church and find everything exactly as we had anticipated, the old aisles, the old paneling at the sides, marks of where the pews were originally.

### William Laurence to Mr. Bolton, Boston Athenaem, July 11, 1912

> I assume that you, like most busy men, have spare time. Wouldn't it be a pleasant thing for you to amuse yourself during that spare time in following our your own suggestion of gathering ideas for tablets for Christ Church in order that we may have some of thim in place next autumn. I could imagine for instance that somewhere in the porch there might be a large wooden tablet with the main features of the Church ~~painted~~ printed (?) in black paint on it. There could also be the Major Pitcairn tablet with the story connected with him. Then, there might well be a Paul Revere tablet giving the true story, if there is one which no one can dispute, of his relations with Christ Church. I think that the people are interested in reading tablets which have the story as well as the bald facts. No doubt other suggestions will occur to you. You may remember also my suggestion in regard to the organ. I enclose a letter which I have just written to Mr. Kellen.

### Enclosure: Copy of letter to Mr. Kellen

> I hope that we shall have a little oasis of old Americanism right in the midst of that Italian population, and that the people there will be brought into connection with it.

Regarding the the repair of the organ:

> we hope we are to have good music there occaisionally on Sunday afternoons with perhaps a cello or a violin or something of that sort for the Italians without religious service.

### Copy of letter from Hock-Hastings Company to R. Clipton Sturgis, July 16, 1912

> We would advise strongly the addition of a Kinetic blower or an Orgoblo to furnish wind for the organ and do away with the present method of hand blowing. The cost of applying such a blowing plant assuming that the current is direct voltage 110 would be $235.

### R. Clipston Sturgis to Bishop Lawrence, July 16, 1912

> I enclose herewith blue print showing showing (sic) general plan of Christ Church as rearranged, and the proposed position of the pulpit and reading desk and lectern. You will see that I have followed the lines of the old pews for the lectern and reading desk. ... and a pulpit which follows very closely the lines of the pulpit in Trinity Church, Newport, but which has no canopy or sounding-board over it. it seemed to me that the position of the pulpit was such as to make it better to omit the sounding-board, which would come close to the gallery. If you think it necessary of desirable to have the sounding board I should think it would be wise to have the pulpit moved nearer to the center of the church.




## Old North: 1911 Renovations: Correspondence, Aug-Dec 1912. Box 21, Folder 19

### R. Clipston Sturgis to Bishop Lawrence, August 9, 1912

> A more thorough and extended examination of the space above the ceiling led to the taking up of some flooring, and under this we found the beam which supported the canopy over the pulpit *and a hole in it*, therefore we know definitely that there was such a canopy, and the actual position of the pulpit. ...
>
> While making this examination of the roof frame they discovered a space that enabled the men to get in above the work that Shubell *Bell* did in the chancel, and there discovered in position the fine pine paneling, marks of which we had discovered lower down. To remove all the work that Mr. Bell put in and restore the church to its original condition would, in my judgement, be a very great improvement, but it would make change in the appearance of the chancel that would seem like a violent one from the conditions with which the old residents have been long familiar, and they might resent it...
>
> We discovered also the original framing showing how the old stairs went to the gallery, and this old arrangement is so great an improvement over the present one, and will add so much to the appearance of the church on the inside that is seems highly desirable to make this change even if it does cost a little more money.

### R. Clipston Sturgis to Bishop Lawrence, August 23, 1912

> Hardly do I make a statement in regard to Christ Church but what something new turns up which involves additional expense. I really feel ashamed to be obliged so frequently to tell you that more money is needed. I told you on Saturday that I thought on the shole I should not advise the expense that would be involved in taking down the elaborate, but rather commonplace, architecture which Mr. Bell gave, and restoring the original panels of the chancel. I find now however that wehn this work was done they pulled down the outside wall of the apse and replace the wall that was about 24 inches thick with one which, now that is is uncovered, proves to be only 4 inches of brick, part of this above the vestry, which we pulled down, but now a considerable proportion of it is above the roof, and quite apart from the fact that is is entirely inadequate to carry its own weight, and is unsafe, is is of course very inadequate protection against the weather. There is no question therefore that this must be rebuilt, and if we are to rebuild it it is far better to rebuild it on the original semi-circular line of the old apse, ...

### R. Clipston Sturgis to Bishop Lawrence, September 4, 1912

> The tablets suggested by Mr. Bolton are nine in number, and they vary from 17 to 100 words, and the cost will be dependent largely upon the number of words, forty cents a letter would be an outside price...
> 
> Another discovery at the church, which will affect the work in the chancel but not, I hope, the cost, is that there was originally a great east window, the jambs of which are clearly shown in the remains of the brick, and the dimensions of which will fit the space of the two centre panels. I am restudying what this window should be and will at once get it figured. I am also attempting to get a little more assistance from the City of Boston in the way of a present of brick for the rebuilding of the chancel wall. If I am succesful with the brick deal, and if, as I hope, the sash will cost not more than the wall, we will make a saving rather than an extra here.

### R. Clipston Sturgis to Bishop Lawrence, September 7, 1912

> In writing the Johnson Marble Co., whose address is 135 Malden Street, I suggested that possible their interest in Boston and in this church would prompt them to offer to give one of these tablets. They wrote at once to say they would be delighted to do so, that their Mr. T. J. Johnson had been in business for nearly six years in the neighborhood of the old North Church. I think it would be much appreciated by Mr. Johnson if you would yourself write and thank him for this.

### R. Clipston Sturgis to Bishop Lawrence, October 26, 1912

In the middle of a series of letters giving updates of the finances, one little note about the painting:

> Sanby's general work on the church and on the apse remains as state in September except for the fact that wen we began to wash off the ceiling and walls preparatory to painting we found the necessity of reskimming portions of the ceilings and walls.

and the rear pews:

> ... and this complete bills to date amount to $5044.91, as given on this certificate, and includes putting in those rear pews, the expense of which I did not want, but which Bolton was very anxious to have, the corner seats and some miscellaneous items.

### R. Clipston Sturgis to Bishop Lawrence, November 9, 1912

> After I had crossed off the expense of planting at Christ Church as the Mayor had offered to do this on behalf of the City, and had crossed off the expense of brick for paving as the Mayor had offered to give us old brick from the paving department, I was surprised to recieve a bill from the paving department for eighteen thousand brick at $7.00 a thousand, and to get word from Mr. Sullivan of the Public Grounds Department that the planting would cost over $100, and that he could not go ahead with it without special authorization to spend that amount. When I took these two matters up with the Mayor it was just before election, and at first I could get no information at all, yesterday I was informed that the City could not give the brick byt that if we disregarded the bill it would never be pressed for payment, and that the City could not furnish plants and set them as this would involve the purchase of material that they did not have in their greenhouses, and this bill would have to be paid, moreover there would be a bill for labor for planting and this also would have to be paid.

### R. Clipston Sturgis to Bishop Lawrence, December 26, 1912

> I trust you will not feel that Christ Church is a fair example of the business management of my office, of which as a rule I am rather proud. I have been dealing with the office of G.W. Morrison, which from the point of view of integrity and good workmanship is unequalled, but from the point of view of estimates and careful book-keeping has been prefectly and impossibly old-fashioned. George Morrison was an old man, he died in November and the work was conducted by his shop, and notwithstanding the fact that I have insisted on accounts from them every week, and have persistently all through the summer called to their attention that they were charging as extra things that were in the original outside limit I have never yet succeeded in pinning them down to anything definite.