---
layout: default
title: Chuck McCallum
---

## Code Samples

- Ruby: 
  - RoR site: [https://github.com/wgbh/aapb2]
  - gem: [https://github.com/WGBH/sony-ci-api]
- Java: [https://github.com/mccalluc/FP-DataEntry]
- JavaScript: [http://mccalluc.github.io/data-demo]

## Work History

**Web Developer, Media Library and Archives, WGBH, Boston, Massachusetts 
(August 2014-present)**: Helped to develop openvault.wgbh.org and 
americanarchive.org, RoR applications with Solr backends for searching media 
collections.

**Project Programmer, FilteredPush, Harvard Herbaria, Cambridge, Massachusetts 
(August 2013-July 2014, funded for one year)**:    Conceived, designed, and 
implemented the FilteredPush Data Entry plugin. Uses HTML5 Web Messaging API 
and jQuery on the client side, with Solr and Jetty on the server side, to 
simplify "copy cataloging" workflows. Also supported other components of the 
FilteredPush project using JSF for the front end, and RDF/SPARQL and MongoDB, 
in addition to SQL, on the back end.

**Software Engineer, Journal of Visualized Experiments, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts (June 2011-July 2013)**:    Led the rearchitecting of 
http://jove.com, using MVC principles and object-oriented PHP. Educated peers 
about software development best practices. Wrote deployment scripts, and 
created a test suite ranging from fine-grained unit tests to end-to-end 
transactions. Also implemented free-text search, replaced our video player, 
managed the transition to a new CDN, and planned for the transition from 
Windows/SQLServer to Linux/MySQL. Built an administrative interface, using the 
Propel ORM library, HTML5 File and History APIs, jQuery, and the SlickGrid JS 
library.

**Software and QA Engineer, ITA Software, Cambridge, Massachusetts (January 
2006-December 2008, January 2010-April 2011)**:    Helped with Needlebase, a 
tool for information gathering and analysis. (The project ended in 2012, but a 
screen-cast is available: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=58Gzlq4zSDk.) 
Supported a team of three, later growing to a dozen, by doing whatever needed 
to be done. As QA, identified bugs in all layers of the system, documented 
reproducers, wrote JUnit tests, and confirmed the fixes. As evangelist, wrote 
blog posts and documentation and created demonstrations of the system. As 
customer support, helped users understand how the software could solve their 
problems, and provided feedback to developers and designers. On temporary 
assignment to the Airline Reservations System (July 2006-July 2007) 
participated in design discussions and implemented a booking flow and an 
administrative interface.

**Library Software Developer, University of Pennsylvania Libraries, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania (2009; funded for one year)**:    For the Penn 
Digital Library (http://dla.library.upenn.edu/dla), created new widgets and 
applied existing widgets to build new collections. Used Solr for the backend, 
WSDLs to connect to outside services, and XLST pipelines in Apache Cocoon for 
display. Managed reindexing jobs with Java / Spring and Perl scripts.

**Software Developer VISTA, Community Software Lab, Lowell, Massachusetts (June 
2005-December 2005)**:    New features and bug fixes in Perl for 
http://mvhub.com, a social-services directory. Supported Apache, PostgreSQL, 
DHCP, DNS, firewall, and backups on Linux systems. Provided tech support in 
person and over the phone. Developed promotional materials for the Lab and 
promoted its hosting, email, and custom software services.   

## Education
- Master of Library Science, University of Maryland, College Park, 2005.
- BA, Geology and Mathematics, Carleton College, Northfield, Minnesota, 1999.
